1957: Sputnik I - First Satellite in Space
sputnik satellite, space missionBettmann//Getty Images
On October 4, 1957, Sputnik I launched from the U.S.S.R.’s Baikonur Cosmodrome and entered Earth’s orbit, becoming the first human-made object to enter space. The aluminum-alloy sphere orbited our planet 1,440 times over 21 days before losing its signal and, most importantly, brought the entire world into the Space Age. The Soviet mission shed light on the density of Earth’s atmosphere and what made a satellite successful. Sputnik I remained in orbit until January 4, 1958, when it burned up reentering our atmosphere.

1961: Vostok I - First Man in Space
vostok i, the space shuttle used by yuri gagarin, space missionKeystone-France//Getty Images
Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space on April 12, 1961, when he circled the Earth in Vostok I. The history-making voyage only lasted 108 minutes before Gagarin ejected himself from the spacecraft and parachuted back to his home planet (this was part of the plan), but it changed the way humans look up at the stars forever. Before launching Gagarin into the heavens, the U.S.S.R. performed a test mission using a prototype of the Vostok I along with a dog and a man-size dummy.

1963: Vostok 6 - First Woman in Space
tereshkova, first woman in space, 1963, space missionHulton Deutsch//Getty Images
Before Sally Ride, Mae Jemison and Christina Koch, there was Valentina Tereshkova. The 26-year-old Soviet cosmonaut became the first woman to visit space on June 16, 1963, when she embarked on a three-day mission aboard the Vostok 6 spacecraft. She completed a total of 41 orbits around Earth, cementing her place in history and inspiring generations of women astronauts for decades to come.

1965: Mariner 4 - First Image of Another Planet
most important space missions mariner 4NASA
On July 14, 1965, Mariner 4 snapped the first ever images of another planet. During its journey, the spacecraft came within 6,118 miles of Mars, and revealed in stunning detail (for the time) sunken craters, rust-colored hills, and ancient carved stream beds—a signal that life might have once existed there. The grainy images captivated scientists and space enthusiasts alike and kickstarted a decades-long obsession with the Red Planet.

1969: Apollo 11 - First Man on the Moon
space mission, 35th anniversary of apollo 11 landing on the moonNASA//Getty Images
Four days after launching from Cape Kennedy in Florida, Neil Armstrong took “one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind” on July 20, 1969, and became the first human to walk on the moon as part of the Apollo 11 mission. Less than 20 minutes later, Buzz Aldrin, who piloted the lunar module, joined his commander. The two explored the moon on foot for three hours while conducting experiments and collecting samples. After rejoining fellow astronaut Michael Collins, who also made the voyage, Armstrong and Aldrin returned to Earth on July 24

1970: Venera 7 - First Landing on Another Planet
space missions venera 13 venusNASA
The Soviet Venera missions highlighted the perils of Venus. Venera 7, the first mission to successfully land on another planet, illuminated the harsh and unforgiving world next door to us. The spacecraft didn’t last long on the surface—try less than an hour —but it returned reams of data for scientists to chew on. Decades later, the 13th Venera mission snapped the first ever images (seen above) of the Venusian surface.

1970: Apollo 13 - A Daring Rescue
space mission, apollo 13 recoveryNASA//Getty Images
Apollo 13 launched without incident on April 11, 1970, but just 56 hours into the mission, things took a turn. Minutes after a live television broadcast in which Jim Lovell, Jack Swigert, and Fred Haise communicated with people back home, an explosion within the craft made it clear that the crew would not be exploring the Fra Mauro area on the moon, as was initially planned. Due to malfunctioning oxygen tanks, both the crew and everyone in ground control had to come up with numerous on-the-fly fixes to combat lack of power, heat, water, and excess carbon monoxide to get everyone back to Earth safely. Despite the odds, on April 17, they did.

1977: Voyager 1 - Mission to Interstellar Space
space mission, saturnian system from voyager 1Heritage Images//Getty Images
Launched in 1977 along with its spacecraft sibling, Voyager 2, Voyager 1 is still going strong today. Though its primary mission was to explore Jupiter and Saturn—the craft discovered volcanoes on Jupiter’s moon and new details about Saturn’s rings—Voyager 1 has gone above and beyond in its exploration ... literally. Not only did it snap a photo of our entire solar system in 1990, but it crossed into interstellar space in 2012, becoming the first human-made probe to do so.

1986: STS-51-L - The Challenger Disaster
space mission, challenger crewNASA//Getty Images
The 25th mission of the United States Space Shuttle program launched on January 28, 1986, and tragically ended in just 73 seconds. STS-51-L was the 10th mission to be conducted on the Challenger space shuttle, but a failed rocket booster led to the shuttle’s disintegration and death of all seven crew members. The launch was scheduled to take place on the 22nd, but was repeatedly pushed back due to bad weather. The mission’s goals were to observe Halley’s Comet, track satellites, and have Christa McAuliffe, a teacher on board, provide lessons to children in classrooms back home.

1990: Hubble Space Telescope - Spying on the Stars
space mission, this view of nearly 10,000 galaxies is called the hubble ultra deep field the snapshot includes galaxies of various ages, sizes, shapes, and colours the smallest, reddest galaxies, about 100, may be among the most distant known, existing when the universe was just 800 million years old the nearest galaxies   the larger, brighter, well defined spirals and ellipticals   thrived about 1 billion years ago, when the cosmos was 13 billion years old the image required 800 exposures taken over the course of 400 hubble orbits around earth the total amount of exposure time was 113 days, taken between sept 24, 2003 and jan 16, 2004NASA, ESA, and S. Beckwith (STScI) and the HUDF Team
The Hubble Space Telescope, the most advanced orbital observatory ever constructed at the time, launched for the cosmos on April 24, 1990. Since then, it has snapped breathtaking images of the universe’s most distant galaxies (seen here in the famed Hubble Deep Field image), spectacular supernovae and our planetary neighbors. The Hubble Space Telescope, which was later joined by an illustrious cadre of new observatories like the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope and the James Webb Space Telescope, reshaped our fundamental understanding of the universe and helped illuminate our place in it.



